Initial Block Guides pages (#49)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/blocks/basics.md

---
title: Creating Blocks
description: A guide for creating simple blocks.
authors:
  - apple502j
---

# Creating Blocks
One of the most common things to do in your mod is adding custom blocks.

> A block, at its simplest form, has no functionality and only one "block state". A block state is a combination of properties, or variations, for the same block - things like rotations, crop age, or redstone activation state. For example, chains have 6 block states; 3 for the `axis` property, times 2 for the `waterlogged` property. A block can have only finite number of pre-defined block states. A block that needs more storage and functionality must have an associated "block entity". A block entity can store infinite, customizable data and perform logics every tick.

Reviewer: See my overall review comment, this is a prime example of a bulky paragraph, you should really split this up - see what I mean through this suggestion, it's easier to read and less repetitive, you keep saying "A block" quite a bit haha :)

```suggestion
Blocks in their most basic form are static objects with a single appearance. To gain variations (like rotation, growth stage, or activation state), a block uses "block states". 

A block can only have a limited number of these predefined states. If a block needs more complex data storage or the ability to perform actions, it requires an associated "block entity", which offers customizable storage and the capacity to run logic each tick.
```

Then, inside your `ModInitializer`'s `onInitialize` method, the block instance must be registered in `Registries.BLOCK`, like this:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/FabricDocsReferenceBlocks.java)

Note that the item for your block is registered separately. Some blocks (like fire) do not have an item form, but most do. To register the corresponding item, create a `BlockItem` instance and register it under `Registries.ITEM`.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::3](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/FabricDocsReferenceBlocks.java)

## Block models and textures
A block has a model, which describes the shape and textures of the rendered block. (This is different from the shape used for checking collision.) A block can have multiple models depending on the block state; the model is picked according to the "blockstate file". Items, including block-placing items, have separate models.

> Let's give the border block a texture with white background and black borders, like this. Most block textures are 16-by-16 square. This is placed at `/textures/block/border.png`, inside the mod resource pack (`/assets/(mod id)/`).

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention where the resources are? eg. `src/client/resources` ?

> ![](/reference/latest/src/main/resources/assets/fabric-docs-reference/textures/block/border.png)

Reviewer 2: This is quite small on the web page, can the size be increased?

> ![](/reference/latest/src/main/resources/assets/fabric-docs-reference/textures/block/border.png)

Reviewer 2: Assets should be in src/client not src/main

This texture is then referenced by a model file named `border.json`, placed under `/models/block` directory inside the mod resource pack. Since the block has the same texture on all six sides, we use `cube_all` as the parent model.

> @[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/resources/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/border.json)

Reviewer 2: This is good so dont change anything, but I do think we want to encorage the use of data generation, especially as its likely going to be a lot more important in future updates.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::3](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/MachinePrototypeBlock.java)

That said, adding a property is usually not enough. There needs to be some logic that actually uses the property. For example, the block state should reflect the direction the player faces when placing - otherwise commands would be necessary to make the block face other directions. They also need to handle structure blocks rotating the block. Those are accomplished by overriding these 3 methods:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::4](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/MachinePrototypeBlock.java)

Here, we use another, very important method: `BlockState#get`, which returns the value for the property.

::: tip
Your code editor or compiler might output a "deprecation warning". These can be ignored - in reality, nothing is deprecated here.

Why are they marked as deprecated, then? Here, it is how Mojang marks methods that are "override-only". Those methods should not be called by modded code (except in `super` call).

> :::

Reviewer 2: Note: It should be possible to remove these in 1.20.5 :)
